docs: update configuration management details and add new configuration page (#1941)
MotiaDev/motia: docs/next/using-iii/configuration.mdx

---
title: "Configuration"
description:
  "Worker settings live in the configuration worker: one file per worker, updated in real time from
  disk, the console, or configuration::set."
owner: "devrel"
type: "how-to"
---

## Settings live in a worker, not in config.yaml

iii splits configuration across two layers:

> - **`config.yaml`** declares _which workers run_. See

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **`config.yaml`** declares _which workers run_ and provides bootstrap values for configuration. See
```

>   [Engine configuration](./engine#engine-configuration).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [Engine configuration](./engine#engine-configuration). Your project's root `config.yaml` 
  file that iii reads at startup indicates which workers iii should start. It is the configuration 
  for iii. Each worker also has their own configuration controlled by the configuration 
  worker described below.
  
  <Note>
  In earlier versions of iii `config.yaml` contained all configuration information. That information is
  now in the configuration worker, and iii performs an automatic one time migration. Refer to the
  changelog for more information.
  </Note>
```

Reviewer: Link to the changelog entry

- **The `configuration` worker** owns _each worker's runtime settings_. It is a schema-validated,
  reactive registry that ships enabled by default: every worker registers its settings schema under
  its own entry (`iii-http`, `iii-state`, `iii-queue`, ...), and every change is validated against

>   that schema and applied to the running worker — no engine restart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  that schema and applied to the running worker.
```

The `config:` block under a worker in `config.yaml` is a **seed**: it is read once, on the first
boot after the worker registers its schema, to create the worker's configuration entry. From then on
the entry is the source of truth and the block is ignored. On the next boot the engine strips the

> dead block from `config.yaml` and leaves a one-line breadcrumb comment pointing at where the value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Since this is a one time migration it should only exist in the migration docs, otherwise it's confusing for users who never experienced this behavior.

> now lives; the `- name:` line and everything else in the file are preserved as written.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The `config:` block under a worker in `config.yaml` is a **seed**: it is read once, on the first
> boot after the worker registers its schema, to create the worker's configuration entry. From then on
> the entry is the source of truth and the block is ignored. On the next boot the engine strips the
> dead block from `config.yaml` and leaves a one-line breadcrumb comment pointing at where the value
> now lives; the `- name:` line and everything else in the file are preserved as written.
> 
> <Note>
>   This applies to workers that register a configuration schema — the built-in workers (`iii-http`,
>   `iii-state`, `iii-queue`, `iii-cron`, `iii-stream`, `iii-pubsub`, `iii-observability`) and
>   registry workers like `database` and `shell` all do. A worker that doesn't register one (for
>   example `iii-worker-manager`) keeps reading its `config.yaml` block directly.
> </Note>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Note>
  This applies to workers that register a configuration schema. Some workers do not register
  a configuration schema. A worker that doesn't register one (for example `iii-worker-manager`) 
  keeps reading its `config.yaml` block directly.
</Note>
```

Reviewer: Do we show what a configuration schema looks like somewhere/how to register one when creating a new worker?

Author: Not yet. Today registering a schema is a raw `configuration::register` call over the bus (there's no SDK sugar for it), and no creating-workers page covers it. Deferring that to a follow-up page under creating-workers (define a schema, register it, react to changes) rather than growing this operator-facing how-to.

Reviewer: Alright let's get this added soon to the creating-workers section

## One file per worker

With the default `fs` adapter, every configuration entry is one YAML file named after the worker, in
`./config` at your project root:

```
config/

>   iii-http.yaml

Reviewer: Are we dropping all the iii- prefixes in this release? If so need to adjust these and anywhere else.

Author: no, not yet

Author: No, the `iii-` prefixes stay in 0.21: the engine's configuration ids are unchanged (`iii-http`, `iii-state`, `iii-queue`, `iii-cron`, `iii-stream`, `iii-pubsub`, `iii-observability`). The only unprefixed one is the `configuration` worker itself. The docs match the code as-is.

  iii-queue.yaml
  iii-state.yaml
  ...
```

Each file carries the entry's identity plus its current value (the registered JSON Schema is not

> persisted — the worker re-registers it on every boot):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each file carries the entry's identity plus its current value:
```

That other line is confusing and a bit off topic. However that information should go into a schema section.

```yaml config/iii-http.yaml
id: iii-http
name: HTTP
description:
  HTTP server settings — host/port binding, CORS, request timeout, concurrency limit, and global
  middleware.
value:
  port: 3111
  host: 127.0.0.1
```

The directory is created on boot and watched from then on.

<Note>
  Before 0.21 the default directory was `./data/configuration`. When running on the default
  location, the engine performs a one-time migration on boot and moves any entries it finds there
  into `./config`. An explicit `directory:` override skips the migration.

> </Note>

Reviewer: Could move this up and use in place of my other suggestion: https://github.com/iii-hq/iii/pull/1941/changes#r3545250713

## Three ways to change a setting — all real-time

### Edit the file

Edit the fields under `value:` and save. The `fs` adapter watches the directory: the change is
validated against the worker's registered schema and applied through exactly the same path as
`configuration::set`. An edit that fails validation is rejected with a warning in the engine logs
and the previous good value stays in effect, so a typo can't take a worker down.

### Use the console

The [console worker](https://workers.iii.dev/workers/console)'s **Configuration** page lists every
registered entry and renders an editing form generated from its JSON Schema — typed fields,
per-adapter variants, and validation before save. `${VAR:default}` templates are shown and saved

> verbatim, so env-driven values survive a console edit. Saving applies immediately.

Reviewer: Confusing AI verbage here.
```suggestion
per-adapter variants, and validation before save. `${VAR:default}` templates are shown and saved
verbatim so environment variables can be recorded via the console. Saving applies immediately.
```

values are never included in the list), and `configuration::schema` returns the schema for one id.
See the [configuration worker docs](https://workers.iii.dev/workers/configuration) for the full
function reference and error codes.

## Environment variables in values

Values support the same `${VAR:default}` syntax as `config.yaml`. Templates are stored verbatim and
expanded against the live process environment on every read, so changing an env var propagates
without rewriting the stored value. A field that consists of a single placeholder is coerced to the
schema's scalar type after expansion — `port: ${HTTP_PORT:3111}` validates as the integer `3111`,
not a string. Pass `raw: true` to `configuration::get` to read the stored template form.

## How changes apply

Most settings hot-apply the moment they change: `iii-http` swaps CORS, timeout, and middleware
without dropping the listener, and binds a new `host`/`port` before releasing the old one. A few
fields are restart-tier — the change is recorded, logged, and takes effect at the next engine start
(for example `iii-state`'s storage adapter). Each worker's page on

> [workers.iii.dev](https://workers.iii.dev/) documents its settings and how they apply.

Reviewer: This contradicts earlier assertions that config hot reloads without a restart.

## Changing where configuration lives

The configuration worker is configured like any other worker — through its own block in

> `config.yaml`. To store the per-worker files somewhere else, set the `fs` adapter's `directory`:

Reviewer: This is not true, now most workers are configured through configuration worker and one file per worker.

Is this a special case? Can configuration worker not store its own config?

```yaml config.yaml
workers:
  - name: configuration
    config:
      adapter:
        name: fs
        config:
          directory: ./config
```

The `bridge` adapter replaces local files entirely and delegates every `configuration::*` call to a
remote iii engine — useful when a fleet of engines should share one configuration source. An
optional `ttl_seconds` cleans up entries for ephemeral workers after their last subscriber
unregisters. See the [configuration worker docs](https://workers.iii.dev/workers/configuration) for

> both.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Note>
The configuration worker also provides a `bridge` adapter for cases where multiple iii engines need to share the same configuration source. See the 
[configuration worker docs](https://workers.iii.dev/workers/configuration) for more details.
</Note>
```

## Reacting to configuration changes

Workers don't poll for changes — they bind a `configuration` trigger. The handler fires on every
register, set, and delete, including file edits and bridge-forwarded events from a remote engine:

```typescript
worker.registerFunction("link::on-config-change", async (event) => {
  console.log(`${event.id} changed:`, event.new_value);
  return {};
});

worker.registerTrigger({
  type: "configuration",
  function_id: "link::on-config-change",
  config: {
    configuration_id: "iii-http", // optional — omit to receive every id
    event_types: ["configuration:updated"], // optional — registered | updated | deleted
  },
});

> ```

Reviewer: This gets into implementation details and belongs in creating-workers, this seems it would also be a good area to explain how to define and register a configuration schema.

Author: Agreed on placement: trimmed this section to a short pointer at the trigger and the worker docs, keeping the SDK snippet out of this operator-facing page. The full "define and register a configuration schema" guide belongs in creating-workers and is deferred to a follow-up (same follow-up as the schema question above), since registration today is a raw `configuration::register` call and deserves a proper page.
